.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt FLATCONF 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm flatconf_read ,
.Nm flatconf_free
.Nd parse a flat key=value configuration file into typed variables
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/flatconf.h
.Ft int
.Fn flatconf_read "const char *path" "struct flatconf *vars" "void (*errfn)(const char *)"
.Ft void
.Fn flatconf_free "struct flatconf *vars"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm flatconf
parses a flat
.Sy key Ns = Ns Sy value
configuration file and stores each value into a caller-provided
destination, with type conversion driven by a table of variable
descriptors.
There is no section nesting, no expression language, and no include
mechanism; it is a deliberately small, predictable substrate on top of
which an application builds its own validation.
.Sh FILE SYNTAX
A configuration file is a sequence of statements separated by
newlines.
Each statement is either empty or has the form:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
name = value
name = [ value value ... ]
.Ed
.Pp
Comments start with
.Sq #
and run to end of line.
A
.Sy name
is a word of alphanumeric and underscore characters and may be up to
.Dv FLATCONF_VAR_MAX_LEN
bytes long.
A
.Sy value
is one of:
.Bl -tag -width "string"
.It word
A bare identifier matching the same character set as a name.
Recognised by the
.Dv FLATCONF_BOOLINT
type for the literals
.Sy yes ,
.Sy no ,
.Sy true ,
and
.Sy false ,
and accepted in string contexts as a shorthand for an unquoted
.Sy string .
.It string
A sequence of arbitrary bytes enclosed in double quotes.
Inside the quotes a backslash escapes the next byte: that byte is
taken literally and no further translation is applied.
The two characters that need escaping to appear inside a string are
.Sq \&"
.Pq written Sq \e\&"
and
.Sq \e
.Pq written Sq \e\e .
Other backslash sequences yield the byte that follows the backslash
verbatim, so
.Sq \en
in the source produces a literal
.Sq n ,
not a newline.
.It positive integer
A non-negative decimal integer, or a hexadecimal integer prefixed with
.Sy 0x .
Parsed as
.Vt uint64_t
through
.Xr strtoul 3 .
.It negative integer
A decimal integer starting with
.Sq - .
Parsed as
.Vt int64_t
through
.Xr strtol 3 .
.El
.Pp
List values are written between square brackets and may span multiple
lines; the elements must all share a type compatible with the
destination's
.Vt enum flatconf_var_type .
.Sh VARIABLE TABLE
The caller declares the set of accepted variables as an array of
.Vt struct flatconf
entries, terminated by the
.Dv FLATCONF_LAST
sentinel:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct flatconf {
        char                    name[FLATCONF_VAR_MAX_LEN + 1];
        enum flatconf_var_type  t;
        void                   *dst;
        size_t                  dst_sz;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va name
is the name as it appears on the left-hand side of an assignment.
.Va t
selects the type-driven conversion that
.Fn flatconf_read
will apply to the value.
.Va dst
points at the caller-owned storage that receives the value.
.Va dst_sz
is either the size of that storage
.Pq for fixed-size types
or is written by
.Fn flatconf_read
.Pq for allocated types ,
to record the allocation's size.
.Pp
The supported variable types are:
.Bl -tag -width "FLATCONF_ALLOCULONGLIST"
.It Dv FLATCONF_STRING
Copy a string or word value into the fixed-size buffer at
.Va dst ,
which must be
.Va dst_sz
bytes.
Parsing fails if the value would overflow the buffer.
.It Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCSTRING
Duplicate a string or word value with
.Xr strdup 3
and store the resulting pointer at
.Va *(char **)dst .
.Va dst_sz
is set to the length of the duplicate, excluding the NUL.
.It Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCSTRINGLIST
Store an allocated, NULL-terminated
.Vt "char **"
array at
.Va *(char ***)dst ,
backed by a single allocation that contains both the pointer array
and the string bytes.
.Va dst_sz
is set to the total allocation size.
An empty list is permitted; in that case the destination is left
untouched and
.Va dst_sz
remains zero.
.It Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCULONGLIST
Store an allocated, NULL-terminated array of
.Vt "uint64_t *"
pointers at
.Va *(uint64_t ***)dst ,
backed by a single allocation that contains both the pointer array
and the integer storage.
.Va dst_sz
is set to the total allocation size.
.It Dv FLATCONF_BOOLINT
Store
.Li 1
or
.Li 0
into the
.Vt int
at
.Va dst
when the value is
.Sy yes Ns / Ns Sy true
or
.Sy no Ns / Ns Sy false
respectively.
.Va dst_sz
must be at least
.Li sizeof(int) .
.It Dv FLATCONF_LONG
Store an
.Vt int64_t
at
.Va dst .
A positive value is accepted only if it fits in
.Vt int64_t .
.Va dst_sz
must be at least
.Li sizeof(int64_t) .
.It Dv FLATCONF_ULONG
Store a
.Vt uint64_t
at
.Va dst .
The value must be a non-negative integer.
.Va dst_sz
must be at least
.Li sizeof(uint64_t) .
.El
.Pp
A given variable name may appear at most once in the table; multiple
assignments to the same name in the file simply overwrite the
destination.
.Sh API
.Fn flatconf_read
opens
.Fa path
and parses it against the variable table
.Fa vars .
For each successful assignment, the corresponding destination is
populated as described above.
Variables not present in the file are left untouched: it is the
caller's responsibility to initialise defaults before calling
.Fn flatconf_read .
A name in the file that is not in the table, or a value that does not
satisfy its destination's type, is treated as a parse error.
.Pp
.Fa errfn
is an optional sink for human-readable error messages.
If
.Dv NULL ,
errors are written to
.Dv stderr .
A typical use is to route errors to
.Xr xlog 3 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static void
cfg_err(const char *msg)
{
        xlog(LOG_ERR, NULL, "config: %s", msg);
}

flatconf_read("/etc/myd.conf", vars, cfg_err);
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn flatconf_free
walks the same variable table and frees the storage that
.Fn flatconf_read
allocated for
.Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCSTRING ,
.Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCSTRINGLIST ,
and
.Dv FLATCONF_ALLOCULONGLIST
entries.
Entries of any other type are skipped.
Entries whose
.Va dst_sz
is zero are treated as never having been assigned and are left alone,
so it is safe to call
.Fn flatconf_free
on a table that
.Fn flatconf_read
populated only partially before failing.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn flatconf_read
returns 0 on success and non-zero on failure
.Pq either Fa path No could not be opened or parsing failed .
On failure
.Va errno
is set when the failure came from
.Xr fopen 3 ;
otherwise the
.Fa errfn
callback is the canonical source of diagnostic information.
.Pp
.Fn flatconf_free
returns no value.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A program that accepts a listen address, a port, and a list of allowed
client common names:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct {
        char       address[256];
        uint64_t   port;
        char     **allowed_cns;
} conf = {
        "127.0.0.1",
        9000,
        NULL,
};

struct flatconf vars[] = {
        { "address",     FLATCONF_STRING,           conf.address,
            sizeof(conf.address) },
        { "port",        FLATCONF_ULONG,            &conf.port,
            sizeof(conf.port) },
        { "allowed_cns", FLATCONF_ALLOCSTRINGLIST,  &conf.allowed_cns,
            0 },
        FLATCONF_LAST
};

static void
cfg_err(const char *msg)
{
        warnx("%s", msg);
}

if (flatconf_read(path, vars, cfg_err) != 0)
        errx(1, "bad config");

\&...

flatconf_free(vars);
.Ed
.Pp
With a configuration file such as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
address = "10.0.0.1"
port = 9100
allowed_cns = [
    "alice.example"
    "bob.example"
]
.Ed
.Sh LIMITATIONS
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
A token cannot exceed
.Dv PATH_MAX
bytes; this applies to words, strings, and integer literals alike.
.It
The string escape syntax is intentionally minimal:
.Sq \e
only quotes the next byte and there are no C-style mnemonics for
non-printable characters.
A string containing a literal newline can be written by embedding the
newline byte directly between the surrounding quotes.
.It
.Fn flatconf_read
is not reentrant: it uses file-scope state during parsing and must not
be called concurrently from multiple threads, even against different
files.
.El
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm flatconf
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
