.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt IDXHEAP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm idxheap_init ,
.Nm idxheap_free ,
.Nm idxheap_insert ,
.Nm idxheap_peek ,
.Nm idxheap_top ,
.Nm idxheap_pop ,
.Nm idxheap_lookup ,
.Nm idxheap_update ,
.Nm idxheap_removei ,
.Nm idxheap_removek
.Nd indexed binary heap with hash lookup
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/idxheap.h
.Ft int
.Fo idxheap_init
.Fa "struct idxheap *ih"
.Fa "size_t sz"
.Fa "int (*cmp)(const void *, const void *)"
.Fa "int (*match)(const void *, const void *)"
.Fa "void (*destroy)(void *)"
.Fa "uint32_t (*hash)(const void *)"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn idxheap_free "struct idxheap *ih"
.Ft int
.Fn idxheap_insert "struct idxheap *ih" "void *data"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_peek "struct idxheap *ih" "int i"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_top "struct idxheap *ih"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_pop "struct idxheap *ih"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_lookup "struct idxheap *ih" "const void *key"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_update "struct idxheap *ih" "const void *key"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_removei "struct idxheap *ih" "int i"
.Ft void *
.Fn idxheap_removek "struct idxheap *ih" "void *key"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm idxheap
data structure is a binary heap whose elements are also indexed by a
hash table, so that an item can be reached either by heap priority or
by an external key without a linear scan.
The heap is ordered as a max-heap with respect to the user-supplied
.Fa cmp
function: at any point the element at index 0 is the one for which
.Fa cmp
returns a non-positive value against every other element.
The hash side of the structure uses chaining; its bucket count is the
initial heap capacity passed to
.Fn idxheap_init .
.Pp
The heap stores opaque
.Vt "void *"
payloads.
Each payload is held in exactly one slot; the heap does not duplicate
or refcount it.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_init
initializes
.Fa ih
in place.
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "destroy"
.It Fa sz
Initial heap capacity.
The heap grows automatically as needed
.Pq see Sx GROWTH ,
but the hash bucket count stays at the value given here.
.It Fa cmp
Comparator over two payloads, with the same return-value convention as
.Xr qsort 3 .
The slot for which
.Fa cmp
returns the greatest value bubbles up to the top.
.It Fa match
Equality predicate over a payload and a lookup key.
.Fn match data key
returns non-zero when
.Fa data
is the entry the caller meant to address with
.Fa key .
The key need not be the payload itself; it can be any value the
.Fa hash
and
.Fa match
functions agree on.
.It Fa destroy
Optional finalizer called by
.Fn idxheap_free
on every remaining payload.
Pass
.Dv NULL
when the caller manages payload lifetime separately.
The heap never invokes
.Fa destroy
from any other entry point.
.It Fa hash
Hash function over a key.
Used to pick the bucket for both insertion and lookup, so the same
function must be used for keys and for the payloads they correspond to.
.El
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_free
releases the storage owned by the heap.
If a
.Fa destroy
callback was supplied to
.Fn idxheap_init ,
it is invoked once on each remaining payload before its slot is
released.
The
.Vt "struct idxheap"
itself is not freed; only its internal arrays are.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_insert
inserts
.Fa data
into the heap and the hash table, then sifts the new entry up to its
ordered position.
The heap grows its internal array when the current capacity is
exhausted; see
.Sx GROWTH .
The caller retains ownership of the bytes
.Fa data
points to; the heap only retains the pointer.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_peek
returns the payload stored at heap slot
.Fa i
without removing it.
Index 0 is the top of the heap.
The heap is not a sorted array: only the parent/child invariants are
guaranteed, so any index other than 0 is suitable for inspection but
not for iteration in priority order.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_top
is a convenience wrapper for
.Fn idxheap_peek ih 0 .
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_pop
removes and returns the top of the heap, restoring the heap invariant.
.Fn idxheap_removei
is the same but removes an arbitrary slot by index, sifting whichever
element backfills it into place.
.Fn idxheap_removek
removes the slot identified by
.Fa key
through the
.Fa hash
and
.Fa match
callbacks.
In all three cases the returned pointer is the payload that was
removed; the caller becomes responsible for freeing it.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_lookup
returns the payload that
.Fa key
matches under
.Fa hash
and
.Fa match ,
or
.Dv NULL
if no such entry is present.
The heap is not modified.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_update
is identical to
.Fn idxheap_lookup
but, on a hit, also re-heapifies from the matched entry's current
position.
It is intended for the pattern where a caller mutates the payload's
priority through its
.Vt "void *"
pointer (for example, advancing a timer's deadline) and then asks the
heap to re-order itself accordingly.
The cost is the usual sift, not a full rebuild.
.Sh GROWTH
The heap array doubles in capacity when
.Fn idxheap_insert
would otherwise overflow it.
The hash bucket count, however, is fixed at construction time and is
not resized.
Callers that expect a wide ratio of inserts to the initial
.Fa sz
should pass a large enough
.Fa sz
upfront to keep hash chains short; otherwise lookup degrades toward
linear in chain length.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn idxheap_init
returns 0 on success and \-1 on failure with
.Va errno
set.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_insert
returns the final heap index at which the new entry came to rest, or
\-1 on failure with
.Va errno
set.
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_peek ,
.Fn idxheap_top ,
.Fn idxheap_pop ,
.Fn idxheap_lookup ,
.Fn idxheap_update ,
.Fn idxheap_removei ,
and
.Fn idxheap_removek
return the matching payload, or
.Dv NULL
if no such entry exists.
The index-based variants set
.Va errno
to
.Er ERANGE
when called with an out-of-range
.Fa i ;
the key-based variants do not set
.Va errno .
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_free
returns no value.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn idxheap_init
fails with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa cmp ,
.Fa match ,
or
.Fa hash
is
.Dv NULL .
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The heap or bucket arrays could not be allocated.
.El
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_insert
fails with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
The heap array could not be grown to accommodate the new entry.
.El
.Pp
.Fn idxheap_peek
and
.Fn idxheap_removei
fail with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ERANGE
.Fa i
is greater than or equal to the current number of entries in the heap.
.El
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
.Nm
provides no internal locking.
A single
.Vt "struct idxheap"
must not be used concurrently from multiple threads without external
synchronisation.
Independent heaps may be used from independent threads.
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
