.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MDR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mdr
.Nd minimal data representation message format
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/mdr.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a compact, self-framed binary message format used by the
.Xr mdrd 8
service and its back-ends to exchange typed application messages.
It is designed to be cheap to encode and decode, to allow incremental
parsing from a stream, and to evolve safely as messages gain new
fields.
.Sh MESSAGE HEADER
A single
.Nm
message consists of:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
a 64-bit big-endian size prefix,
.It
a 32-bit feature bitmap describing which optional fields follow,
.It
a 64-bit domain/code/variant
.Pq Sy DCV
identifier,
.It
optionally:
.Sy tail_bytes ,
.Sy stream_id ,
.Sy acct_id ,
.Sy trace_id
(controlled by the feature bits),
.It
a typed structured payload, followed by optional unstructured tail
bytes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Sy DCV
triple lets a message identify itself globally:
.Bl -tag -width "variant"
.It Sy domain
A namespace owner, typically a service or application.
.It Sy code
The message type within that domain (request, event, etc.).
.It Sy variant
A version of that code, allowing a single
.Pq Sy domain , code
pair to evolve through additive variants.
.El
.Pp
A
.Sy DCV
is constructed with the
.Fn MDR_DCV
macro or with
.Fn mdr_mkdcv .
The masks
.Dv MDR_MASK_D ,
.Dv MDR_MASK_DC ,
and
.Dv MDR_MASK_DCV
isolate the domain, the domain+code, or the full triple respectively.
.Pp
The feature bitmap is used to negotiate optional header fields without
introducing new variants.
A receiver that does not understand a feature bit must reject the
message; this is what makes
.Nm
forward-compatible.
The currently defined flags are
.Dv MDR_FTAILBYTES ,
.Dv MDR_FSTREAMID ,
.Dv MDR_FACCTID ,
and
.Dv MDR_FTRACEID .
The combined mask
.Dv MDR_FALL
covers all of them.
.Sh FIELD TYPES
The structured payload of a message is described by a
.Vt struct mdr_spec
that lists the type of each field in order.
The
.Vt enum mdr_type
constants below are referenced in spec definitions and in the
.Va type
member of each
.Vt struct pmdr_vec
or
.Vt struct umdr_vec
entry.
.Pp
Both vectors carry the value in a tagged union accessed through their
.Va v
member.
The union member that must be used for any given type is dictated by
the type tag.
.Bl -tag -width "MDR_AS / MDR_AM"
.It Dv MDR_U8 , Dv MDR_U16 , Dv MDR_U32 , Dv MDR_U64
Unsigned integers of the named bit width.
Pack:
.Va pv[i].v.u8 ,
.Va .v.u16 ,
.Va .v.u32 ,
.Va .v.u64 .
Unpack: same union members on
.Vt struct umdr_vec .
.It Dv MDR_I8 , Dv MDR_I16 , Dv MDR_I32 , Dv MDR_I64
Signed integers of the named bit width.
Pack and unpack via
.Va .v.i8 ,
.Va .v.i16 ,
.Va .v.i32 ,
.Va .v.i64 .
.It Dv MDR_F32 , Dv MDR_F64
IEEE 754 single- and double-precision floats.
Pack and unpack via
.Va .v.f32
and
.Va .v.f64 .
.It Dv MDR_S
Null-terminated byte string.
The library does not enforce or interpret any character encoding;
the bytes can be anything as long as the field ends in a NUL.
Pack via
.Va .v.s ,
a null-terminated
.Vt const char * ;
the length is taken from
.Xr strlen 3 .
Unpack via
.Va .v.s.bytes
.Pq Vt const char *
and
.Va .v.s.sz
.Pq Vt uint64_t .
The unpacked pointer borrows into the message buffer and remains valid
only as long as the parent
.Vt umdr ;
it is null-terminated, and
.Va sz
gives the string length excluding the trailing NUL, equivalent to
.Xr strlen 3 .
A message whose string field is missing its trailing NUL is rejected
with
.Er EBADMSG .
.It Dv MDR_B
Opaque byte blob.
Pack via
.Va .v.b.bytes
.Pq Vt const void *
and
.Va .v.b.sz
.Pq Vt uint64_t .
Unpack mirrors that; the returned
.Va bytes
pointer borrows into the message buffer and remains valid only as long
as the parent
.Vt umdr .
.It Dv MDR_M
Nested
.Nm
message.
Pack via
.Va .v.pmdr
.Pq Vt const struct pmdr *
when embedding a message you have just built, or
.Va .v.umdr
.Pq Vt const struct umdr *
when forwarding a message you received.
Unpack via
.Va .v.m ,
which is a
.Vt struct umdr
borrowing into the parent buffer.
.It Dv MDR_RSVB
Reserved byte region: a placeholder of declared size that will be filled
in by the caller after
.Fn pmdr_pack
returns.
Pack via
.Va .v.rsvb.dst
.Pq Vt "void **" ,
into which
.Fn pmdr_pack
writes a pointer to the reserved area, and
.Va .v.rsvb.sz ,
the number of bytes to reserve.
After packing the caller writes exactly that many bytes through the
returned pointer.
Useful when the source data is in a foreign format (for example, an
ASN.1
.Vt X509 )
that produces its output through a write-then-advance pointer; see
.Xr mdrd 8 's
internal
.Fn pack_bein
for a representative example.
There is no
.Dv MDR_RSVB
counterpart in
.Vt struct umdr_vec ;
on receive, an
.Dv MDR_RSVB
field appears as a regular
.Dv MDR_B .
.It Dv MDR_AU8 ... Dv MDR_AU64 , Dv MDR_AI8 ... Dv MDR_AI64 , Dv MDR_AF32 , Dv MDR_AF64
Arrays of the corresponding scalar type.
Pack via
.Va .v.au8.length
.Pq Vt int32_t
and
.Va .v.au8.items
.Pq pointer to caller-owned array ,
and similarly for the other widths.
Unpack returns an array handle described in the next section, not the
elements themselves.
.It Dv MDR_AS
Array of strings.
Pack via
.Va .v.as.length
and
.Va .v.as.items
.Pq Vt "const char **" ,
an array of null-terminated strings.
Unpack returns an array handle.
.It Dv MDR_AM
Array of nested messages.
Pack via
.Va .v.am.length
and
.Va .v.am.items
.Pq Vt "const struct pmdr *" ,
an array of already-built messages.
Unpack returns an array handle whose elements can be materialised as
.Vt struct mdr .
.El
.Sh ARRAY ACCESS
For every array type, the corresponding
.Vt struct umdr_vec
union member is a
.Vt struct umdr_vec_ah
.Pq Em array handle
rather than the elements themselves.
This avoids copying the entire array into a per-vector buffer at unpack
time.
.Pp
The handle exposes:
.Bl -tag -width "umdr_vec_alen"
.It Fn umdr_vec_atype ah
Return the element type
.Pq one of the Dv MDR_*
of the array.
.It Fn umdr_vec_alen ah
Return the number of elements in the array.
.El
.Pp
Elements are then materialised one or more at a time into a
caller-owned buffer with a type-specific extractor:
.Bl -tag -width "umdr_vec_af64"
.It Fn umdr_vec_au8 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_au16 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_au32 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_au64 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_ai8 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_ai16 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_ai32 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_ai64 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_af32 ah dst n
.It Fn umdr_vec_af64 ah dst n
Copy up to
.Fa n
elements from
.Fa ah
into the caller buffer
.Fa dst .
.It Fn umdr_vec_as ah dst n
Copy up to
.Fa n
elements from
.Fa ah
into the caller buffer
.Fa dst ,
a
.Vt "const char **"
array of length
.Fa n .
On return, each slot holds a pointer borrowed from the message buffer,
whose lifetime is bound to the parent
.Vt umdr .
If the array has fewer than
.Fa n
elements, a trailing
.Dv NULL
pointer is written after the last element, so callers may loop until
.Dv NULL
instead of consulting the returned count:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
const char  *strs[64];
const char **s;

umdr_vec_as(&uv[i].v.as, strs, 64);
for (s = strs; *s != NULL; s++)
	printf("%s\en", *s);
.Ed
.It Fn umdr_vec_am ah dst n
Copy up to
.Fa n
elements from
.Fa ah
into the caller buffer
.Fa dst ,
a buffer of
.Vt struct mdr .
Each populated entry borrows into the message buffer and is valid only
for the lifetime of the parent
.Vt umdr .
.El
.Pp
Each extractor returns the number of elements copied, or
.Dv MDR_FAIL
on error.
.Sh PACK AND UNPACK
Two distinct handle types ensure pack and unpack code paths cannot be
accidentally crossed:
.Bl -tag -width "struct pmdr"
.It Vt struct pmdr
Pack handle, used for building outbound messages.
.It Vt struct umdr
Unpack handle, used for decoding inbound messages.
.El
.Pp
.Fn pmdr_init
binds a pmdr handle to a caller-owned buffer of
.Fa size
bytes with the requested feature flags.
.Fn pmdr_free
releases any resources the handle has allocated outside the buffer
.Pq currently a no-op for fixed-size buffers .
.Fn pmdr_pack
serialises a vector of fields against a registered spec and returns
the number of bytes written, or
.Dv MDR_FAIL
on error.
A typical pack sequence:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct pmdr     m;
struct pmdr_vec pv[2];
char            buf[256];

pmdr_init(&m, buf, sizeof(buf), MDR_FNONE);
pv[0].type   = MDR_U32; pv[0].v.u32 = 42;
pv[1].type   = MDR_S;   pv[1].v.s   = "hello";
pmdr_pack(&m, my_spec, pv, PMDRVECLEN(pv));
write(fd, pmdr_buf(&m), pmdr_size(&m));
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn umdr_init
binds an umdr handle to a buffer that contains a complete message
.Pq see Sx READING FROM STREAMS .
.Fn umdr_init0
is the same but does not require the buffer to actually contain valid
header bytes yet, useful for incremental fill;
.Fa accept_features
records which optional features the caller is prepared to handle.
.Fn umdr_unpack
walks the typed payload against a spec and populates the vector with
either scalar values or array handles, returning the number of bytes
consumed or
.Dv MDR_FAIL
on type mismatch or short input.
A typical unpack sequence:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct umdr     m;
struct umdr_vec uv[2];

umdr_init(&m, buf, n, MDR_FNONE);
if (umdr_unpack(&m, my_spec, uv, UMDRVECLEN(uv)) == MDR_FAIL)
	/* handle decode error */;
uint32_t    n   = uv[0].v.u32;
const char *str = uv[1].v.s.bytes;
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn umdr_copy
duplicates an umdr handle into a fresh one, copying the underlying
buffer contents as well.
This is useful when an unpacked nested message
.Pq Va uv[i].v.m
must outlive its parent buffer.
.Sh OPTIONAL FIELDS AND TAIL BYTES
Some metadata is too situational to warrant a place in every message
but too common to keep reinventing.
Header-level features carry that data when their bit is set; readers
that do not understand a bit reject the message.
.Bl -tag -width "pmdr_add_tail_bytes"
.It Fn pmdr_set_stream_id m sid
Set
.Dv MDR_FSTREAMID
and write the 64-bit
.Fa sid
into the header.
On the read side, retrieve with
.Fn umdr_stream_id .
.It Fn pmdr_set_acct_id m aid
Set
.Dv MDR_FACCTID
and write the 64-bit accounting id; retrieve with
.Fn umdr_acct_id .
.It Fn pmdr_set_trace_id m tid
Set
.Dv MDR_FTRACEID
and write the 128-bit trace id
.Pq a Vt union mdr_trace_id ;
retrieve with
.Fn umdr_trace_id .
.It Fn pmdr_add_tail_bytes m n
Set
.Dv MDR_FTAILBYTES
and declare that
.Fa n
unstructured bytes follow the typed payload.
The caller writes those bytes to the buffer at the position returned by
.Fn pmdr_tell .
On the read side,
.Fn umdr_tail_bytes
returns the number of trailing bytes and writes a pointer to them
through its
.Fa dst
argument.
Tail bytes are useful for forwarding large payloads (file contents,
TLS certificate chains) that would inflate the structured part of a
message.
They are
.Em not
counted in
.Fn umdr_size .
.El
.Sh INSPECTING MESSAGES
The following accessors work on either pack or unpack handles, without
touching the underlying buffer:
.Bl -tag -width "umdr_acct_id"
.It Fn pmdr_buf m
.It Fn umdr_buf m
Return a pointer to the start of the message buffer.
The pmdr variant returns a writable pointer; the umdr variant returns
a read-only pointer.
.It Fn pmdr_size m
.It Fn umdr_size m
Return the on-wire size of the message in bytes, excluding any tail
bytes.
.It Fn pmdr_tell m
.It Fn umdr_tell m
Return the current cursor offset within the buffer, used during
incremental fill.
.It Fn umdr_pending m
Return the number of bytes still expected to complete the message.
A value of zero means the message is fully buffered and can be
unpacked.
.It Fn pmdr_features m
.It Fn umdr_features m
Return the feature bitmap.
.It Fn pmdr_domain m , Fn pmdr_code m , Fn pmdr_variant m
.It Fn umdr_domain m , Fn umdr_code m , Fn umdr_variant m
Return the three components of the
.Sy DCV
triple.
.It Fn pmdr_dcv m
.It Fn umdr_dcv m
Return the full 64-bit
.Sy DCV .
.It Fn umdr_dcv_match m dcv mask
Convenience predicate: compare the message's
.Sy DCV
against
.Fa dcv
under
.Fa mask
.Pq one of Dv MDR_MASK_D , MDR_MASK_DC , MDR_MASK_DCV ,
returning non-zero on match.
Useful when routing messages by domain alone.
.It Fn pmdr_tail_bytes m dst
.It Fn umdr_tail_bytes m dst
Return the number of trailing bytes and store a pointer to them in
.Fa *dst .
Returns zero if the
.Dv MDR_FTAILBYTES
feature is not set.
.It Fn pmdr_print fp m
.It Fn umdr_print fp m
Pretty-print a message to the given
.Vt FILE * .
Intended for debugging.
.El
.Sh READING FROM STREAMS
Messages on the wire may arrive in fragments.
The library provides helpers that fill a caller-owned buffer one chunk
at a time, returning a positive value only once an entire message has
been assembled:
.Bl -tag -width "mdr_buf_from_BIO"
.It Fn mdr_fill
The general form: a user-supplied callback supplies bytes.
.It Fn mdr_buf_from_fd
Convenience wrapper that reads from a file descriptor.
.It Fn mdr_buf_from_BIO
Convenience wrapper that reads from an OpenSSL or LibreSSL
.Vt BIO ,
suitable for use with the memory-backed BIOs maintained by
.Xr tlsev 3 .
.El
.Pp
Each of these returns a partial-progress sentinel
.Pq Er EAGAIN
when more input is needed, and the full byte count of an assembled
message when one is ready to be passed to
.Fn umdr_init .
.Sh SPEC REGISTRY
Messages are looked up by
.Sy DCV
through a process-global registry, so a receiver can dispatch incoming
traffic without prior knowledge of the spec the sender used.
.Bl -tag -width "mdr_register_builtin_specs"
.It Fn mdr_register_spec def
Register a
.Vt struct mdr_def
.Pq DCV, label, and a NUL-terminated array of Vt enum mdr_type
in the registry, returning the resulting
.Vt struct mdr_spec * .
Registration is one-shot; calling twice with the same DCV is an error.
.It Fn mdr_registry_get dcv
Look up a previously registered spec by its
.Sy DCV ,
or return
.Dv NULL .
.It Fn mdr_register_builtin_specs
Register the specs for the built-in messages
.Po
.Fn mdr_msg_ping ,
.Fn mdr_msg_pong ,
.Fn mdr_msg_ok ,
.Fn mdr_msg_error ,
.Fn mdr_msg_test ,
plus the messages used between
.Xr mdrd 8
and its back-end
.Pc .
Idempotent.
.It Fn mdr_registry_clear
Tear down the registry.
Called automatically by
.Xr mdrd 8 's
shutdown path; rarely needed elsewhere.
.It Fn mdr_spec_base_sz spec extra_bytes
Return the minimum number of bytes needed to pack a message of
.Fa spec
plus
.Fa extra_bytes
of variable-size payload
.Pq strings, blobs, RSVB .
Useful to size a stack buffer before
.Fn pmdr_init .
.It Fn mdr_spec_vlen spec
Return the number of fields in
.Fa spec ;
that is, the size of the
.Vt struct pmdr_vec
or
.Vt struct umdr_vec
array required by
.Fn pmdr_pack
or
.Fn umdr_unpack .
.El
.Pp
A typical application defines its message specs as static
.Vt struct mdr_def
literals, declares a global pointer to receive each registered
.Vt struct mdr_spec * ,
and registers them at startup:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#define MY_DOMAIN          0x12345678
#define MY_DCV_LOGIN       MDR_DCV(MY_DOMAIN, 0x0001, 0x0000)
#define MY_DCV_LOGIN_REPLY MDR_DCV(MY_DOMAIN, 0x0001, 0x0001)

static struct mdr_def my_login_def = {
	MY_DCV_LOGIN,
	"my.login",
	{
		MDR_S,    /* username */
		MDR_B,    /* auth token */
		MDR_AU32, /* requested capability ids */
		MDR_LAST
	}
};
const struct mdr_spec *my_msg_login;

static struct mdr_def my_login_reply_def = {
	MY_DCV_LOGIN_REPLY,
	"my.login.reply",
	{
		MDR_U64,  /* session id */
		MDR_LAST
	}
};
const struct mdr_spec *my_msg_login_reply;

int
my_register_specs(void)
{
	if (mdr_register_builtin_specs() == MDR_FAIL)
		return -1;
	if ((my_msg_login =
	     mdr_register_spec(&my_login_def)) == NULL ||
	    (my_msg_login_reply =
	     mdr_register_spec(&my_login_reply_def)) == NULL)
		return -1;
	return 0;
}
.Ed
.Pp
The type list inside each
.Vt struct mdr_def
is terminated by
.Dv MDR_LAST .
Once registered, the resulting spec pointer is passed to
.Fn pmdr_pack
on the sender side and either looked up via
.Fn mdr_registry_get
.Pq for type-dispatched receivers
or passed directly to
.Fn umdr_unpack
on the receiver side.
.Sh ERRORS
Functions in
.Nm
report failure by returning
.Dv MDR_FAIL
.Pq the constant Sy \-1
with
.Va errno
set.
Common values include:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
Argument violates an invariant of the function.
.It Bq Er EOVERFLOW
A length field would exceed the size of the message or the buffer.
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
Returned by stream readers when more input is required.
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
The message advertises a feature bit the implementation does not
recognize, or a spec lookup failed.
.It Bq Er EBADMSG
A field could not be decoded against its declared type.
.El
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
A single
.Vt struct pmdr
or
.Vt struct umdr
handle is not safe to use from multiple threads concurrently.
Concurrent use of independent handles, including against different
buffers, is safe.
The spec registry is read-mostly and is safe to consult from multiple
threads after all specs have been registered.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdrd_recv 3 ,
.Xr tlsev 3 ,
.Xr mdrd 8
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
