.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MDRD.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mdrd.conf
.Nd configuration file for the mdrd daemon
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
configures the
.Xr mdrd 8
daemon.
Each setting is a
.Ar key Sy = Ar value
assignment on its own line; comments begin with
.Sq # .
String values are enclosed in double quotes, lists in square brackets,
and booleans accept
.Sy true
or
.Sy false .
The file is read once at startup; most settings cannot be changed
without restarting the daemon
.Po see Sx SIGNALS in Xr mdrd 8 Pc .
The default path is
.Pa /etc/mdrd.conf ;
override with
.Fl c
on the
.Xr mdrd 8
command line.
.Sh PROCESS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy uid Ns , Sy gid
User and group the daemon switches to after binding its listen sockets.
.It Sy enable_coredumps
Whether to permit core dumps after privilege drop.
Defaults to disabled.
.It Sy pid_file
Path to the pid file.
The file is opened, locked with
.Xr flock 2 ,
and never closed for the lifetime of the daemon, preventing concurrent
instances.
.It Sy counters_sock
.Ux Ns -domain
socket path on which the parent process accepts
.Sy mdrd stat
queries.
.El
.Sh TLS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy ca_file
Path to the PEM-encoded trust anchor used to verify client certificates.
.It Sy cert_file
Path to the PEM-encoded server certificate (chain).
.It Sy key_file
Path to the PEM-encoded private key.
.It Sy crl_file
Optional path to a single CRL in PEM format.
.It Sy crl_path
Optional directory of CRL files
.Pq Pa *.crl ,
loaded together with
.Sy crl_file .
.It Sy require_client_cert
If true, clients must present a certificate verified by
.Sy ca_file
.Po and not revoked by any loaded CRL Pc
to complete the handshake.
If false, self-signed or unknown-issuer client certs are accepted; the
back-end is then responsible for performing its own authorization.
.It Sy monitor_ssl_files
If true, the daemon periodically restats
.Sy cert_file
and the CRLs and reloads them when they change.
The scan interval is controlled by
.Sy crl_scan_interval_sec .
A
.Dv SIGHUP
forces an immediate reload independent of this setting.
.It Sy crl_scan_interval_sec
Seconds between automatic CRL/cert rescan when
.Sy monitor_ssl_files
is enabled.
.El
.Sh LISTENERS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy port
TCP port to listen on.
.It Sy listen_backlog
Backlog passed to
.Xr listen 2 .
.It Sy prefork
Number of independent listener processes.
For maximum throughput, set this to the number of cores on the host;
see the sample configuration for guidance.
.It Sy max_clients
Per-prefork cap on concurrent TLS sessions.
.It Sy max_conn_per_ip
Per-prefork cap on concurrent connections from a single peer address.
.It Sy socket_timeout_min Ns , Sy socket_timeout_max
Bounds in seconds on the per-connection idle timeout.
The effective timeout scales linearly between these two values as the
listener fills up: at full load, idle clients are reaped after
.Sy socket_timeout_min
seconds; at low load, after
.Sy socket_timeout_max .
.It Sy use_rcv_lowat
If true, the listener manages
.Dv SO_RCVLOWAT
on each client socket to avoid waking the event loop on partial TLS
records.
Recommended.
.It Sy so_debug
.Pq OpenBSD only
Sets
.Dv SO_DEBUG
on the listening socket.
.It Sy rcvbuf Ns , Sy sndbuf
.Dv SO_RCVBUF
and
.Dv SO_SNDBUF
in bytes, applied to every accepted client socket.
A value of 0 leaves the operating system to auto-tune.
.El
.Sh MESSAGES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy max_payload_size
Upper bound, in bytes, on a single client message.
TLS records are normally at most 16 KiB; values larger than that come at
the cost of stack and per-connection memory.
On
.Ox
the pipe between mdrd and the back-end is 16 KiB, so payloads above
that size will require a blocking write to the back-end pipe.
.It Sy max_cert_size
Upper bound, in bytes, on a single client leaf certificate.
4 KiB is comfortable for classical certs; raise to 8 or 16 KiB for
post-quantum certificates (ML-DSA-65 and above).
.It Sy allowed_mdr_domains
Optional list of 32-bit mdr
.Sy domain
values accepted from clients.
Messages whose domain is not on the list are rejected with
.Dv MDR_ERR_NOTSUPP .
If unset, all domains are allowed.
.It Sy dbg_delay_to_backend_seconds
Debugging knob that sleeps the listener for the specified number of
seconds before forwarding each client message, giving an operator time
to attach a debugger to the back-end.
Leave at 0 in production.
.El
.Sh BACKEND
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Sy backend_argv
Command line of the back-end process to spawn, given as a list whose
first element is the executable.
.It Sy backend_uid Ns , Sy backend_gid
User and group the back-end runs as.
.It Sy backend_promises
.Pq OpenBSD only
Promises passed to
.Xr pledge 2
when the back-end is exec'd.
.It Sy backend_unveils
.Pq OpenBSD only
List of
.Ar perms Ns = Ns Ar path
entries passed to
.Xr unveil 2
before the back-end is exec'd.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /etc/mdrd.conf
Default configuration file.
.It Pa /etc/examples/mdrd.conf.sample
Annotated sample configuration shipped with the distribution.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdrd 8 ,
.Xr pledge 2 ,
.Xr unveil 2
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
