.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MDRD 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mdrd
.Nd TLS-terminating message daemon
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm mdrd
.Op Fl df
.Op Fl c Ar config
.Op Cm shutdown | stat
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a forking TLS-terminating front end that decrypts client traffic
and forwards application-level
.Xr mdr 3
messages to a back-end process specified in its configuration file.
Each
.Sy prefork
worker runs its own
.Xr tlsev 3
event loop and is paired with a single back-end instance, communicating
with it through a pipe.
.Pp
A separate parent process supervises the workers, accepts counter
queries on a
.Ux Ns -domain
socket, and respawns workers that exit.
.Pp
The options are:
.Bl -tag -width "-c config"
.It Fl c Ar config
Read configuration from
.Ar config
instead of
.Pa /etc/mdrd.conf .
.It Fl d
Debug mode: do not fork into the background, log everything to standard
error.
Implies
.Fl f .
.It Fl f
Do not detach from the controlling terminal.
.El
.Pp
The subcommands are:
.Bl -tag -width "shutdown"
.It Cm shutdown
Send
.Dv SIGTERM
to the running daemon, read from
.Sy pid_file
in the configuration.
.It Cm stat
Connect to
.Sy counters_sock
and print accumulated per-worker counters.
The set of counters is described in
.Xr tlsev_dump_counters 3 .
.El
.Sh SIGNALS
.Bl -tag -width "SIGTERM"
.It Dv SIGTERM , Dv SIGINT
Begin an orderly shutdown.
The listening sockets are closed first; existing clients are allowed to
drain in-flight requests before being closed.
.Nm
exits once all workers have exited.
.It Dv SIGHUP
Request a re-read of the server certificate, key, and CRLs at the next
scan iteration.
Configuration values other than the TLS material are
.Em not
reloaded; restart the daemon to change those.
.It Dv SIGCHLD
Workers that exit are reaped automatically and respawned (unless a
shutdown is already in progress).
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa
.It Pa /etc/mdrd.conf
Default configuration.
.It Pa /var/run/mdrd.pid
Default pid file.
.It Pa /var/run/mdrd_counters.sock
Default counters socket.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdr 3 ,
.Xr mdrd_recv 3 ,
.Xr tlsev 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_dump_counters 3 ,
.Xr mdrd.conf 5
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
