.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt MDRD_RECV 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mdrd_recv ,
.Nm mdrd_beout ,
.Nm mdrd_beout_ok ,
.Nm mdrd_beout_error ,
.Nm mdrd_besession_set_data ,
.Nm mdrd_purge_sessions ,
.Nm mdrd_purge_sessions_cb
.Nd backend-side API for an mdrd-spawned service
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/mdrd.h
.Ft ptrdiff_t
.Fn mdrd_recv "struct mdrd_recvhdl *mrh" "int timeout_ms"
.Ft int
.Fn mdrd_beout "const struct mdrd_besession *sess" "uint32_t flags" "const struct pmdr *msg"
.Ft int
.Fn mdrd_beout_ok "const struct mdrd_besession *sess" "uint32_t flags"
.Ft int
.Fo mdrd_beout_error
.Fa "const struct mdrd_besession *sess"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fa "uint32_t errcode"
.Fa "const char *errdesc"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo mdrd_besession_set_data
.Fa "struct mdrd_besession *sess"
.Fa "void *data"
.Fa "void (*free_data)(void *)"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions "struct mdrd_recvhdl *mrh" "time_t age_seconds"
.Ft int
.Fo mdrd_purge_sessions_cb
.Fa "struct mdrd_recvhdl *mrh"
.Fa "time_t age_seconds"
.Fa "void (*cb)(struct mdrd_besession *, void *)"
.Fa "void *cbargs"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions implement the back-end half of the mdrd request/response
protocol.
A back-end process is spawned by
.Xr mdrd 8 ,
inherits its standard input from a pipe connected to mdrd, and uses
.Fn mdrd_recv
in a loop to receive client requests and the
.Fn mdrd_beout
family to send responses back.
.Pp
Per-client state is tracked in
.Vt "struct mdrd_besession" ,
keyed by the unique session identifier mdrd assigns at accept time.
Sessions persist across requests from the same client and are torn down
when mdrd reports the client has closed, when the back-end explicitly
flags
.Dv MDRD_BEOUT_FCLOSE
on a response, or when
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions
reaps them by age.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_recv
reads one message from mdrd into
.Fa mrh\->buf
.Pq sized by Fa mrh\->bufsz ,
waiting up to
.Fa timeout_ms
milliseconds for input.
On success, populates
.Fa mrh\->msg
with the decoded client message (if any) and
.Fa mrh\->session
with the session it belongs to.
The function transparently handles the protocol's three message
kinds:
.Bl -tag -width "MDR_DCV_MDRD_BEIN"
.It Dv MDR_DCV_MDRD_BEIN
A request from a client.
A new session is created on first contact;
.Fa mrh\->session\->is_new
is set to 1 the first time the back-end sees a given session.
.Fa mrh\->msg
points at the client's application-level message.
.It Dv MDR_DCV_MDRD_BECLOSE
mdrd reports the client has closed.
The corresponding session is freed automatically before
.Fn mdrd_recv
returns; the back-end need not respond.
The function loops internally and continues reading until a
.Dv MDR_DCV_MDRD_BEIN
arrives or the timeout expires.
.It Dv MDR_DCV_MDRD_BESESSERR
mdrd reports it could not deliver a previous back-end response
.Pq client gone, fd mismatched, etc. .
Treated identically to
.Dv MDR_DCV_MDRD_BECLOSE :
the session is freed and the loop continues.
.El
.Pp
If the previous response flagged
.Dv MDRD_BEOUT_FCLOSE ,
the corresponding session is freed at the start of the next
.Fn mdrd_recv
call.
This is why responses must always be sent via the
.Fn mdrd_beout
family, which sets the close flag on the session, and not by writing
directly to standard output.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_beout
sends an application-level message
.Fa msg
to the client of session
.Fa sess .
.Fa flags
is a bitwise-OR of
.Dv MDRD_BEOUT_FNONE
and
.Dv MDRD_BEOUT_FCLOSE ;
setting the latter requests mdrd to drain and close the client
connection after delivering the response.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_beout_ok
is a convenience for sending a bare
.Vt mdr_msg_ok
acknowledgement when there is no payload to return.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_beout_error
sends an
.Vt mdr_msg_error
with the given numeric code and human-readable description.
.Fa errcode
is one of the
.Vt enum mdr_err_code
values.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_besession_set_data
attaches a per-session opaque value
.Fa data
to
.Fa sess ,
along with an optional destructor
.Fa free_data
invoked when the session is freed.
This is the canonical place for back-ends to keep per-connection state
(authenticated identity, prepared statement handles, etc.).
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions
walks the session table and frees any session that has been idle for at
least
.Fa age_seconds .
The session bound to
.Fa mrh\->session
.Pq if any
is preserved.
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions_cb
behaves identically but invokes
.Fa cb
on each session immediately before it is freed, with
.Fa cbargs
forwarded unchanged; useful for logging or for finalising any
out-of-band state the back-end keeps separately from
.Fa data .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn mdrd_recv
returns:
.Bl -tag -width "> 0"
.It > 0
The number of bytes consumed from mdrd to assemble the current message.
.Fa mrh\->msg
and
.Fa mrh\->session
are valid.
.It 0
End of stream from mdrd (the parent has closed the pipe); the back-end
should exit.
.It Dv MDR_FAIL
Failure;
.Va errno
is set, with
.Er ETIMEDOUT
indicating that
.Fa timeout_ms
elapsed without a full message arriving.
.El
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_beout ,
.Fn mdrd_beout_ok ,
and
.Fn mdrd_beout_error
return 0 on success and \-1 on failure with
.Va errno
set
.Po typically from
.Xr write 2
or
.Xr pmdr_pack 3
.Pc .
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions
and
.Fn mdrd_purge_sessions_cb
return the number of sessions freed.
.Pp
.Fn mdrd_besession_set_data
returns no value.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A minimal echo back-end:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct mdrd_recvhdl mrh = { .buf = buf, .bufsz = sizeof(buf) };
ptrdiff_t n;

for (;;) {
	n = mdrd_recv(&mrh, 1000);
	if (n == 0)
		exit(0);                /* parent closed */
	if (n == MDR_FAIL) {
		if (errno == ETIMEDOUT) {
			mdrd_purge_sessions(&mrh, 300);
			continue;
		}
		err(1, "mdrd_recv");
	}
	/* echo the client's payload back */
	mdrd_beout(mrh.session, MDRD_BEOUT_FNONE, &reply);
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mdrd 8 ,
.Xr mdr 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm mdrd
back-end interface first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
