.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV_PEER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev_id ,
.Nm tlsev_fd ,
.Nm tlsev_peer ,
.Nm tlsev_peer_cert ,
.Nm tlsev_get ,
.Nm tlsev_get_by_ctx
.Nd inspect and look up tlsev client sessions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn tlsev_id "struct tlsev *t"
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_fd "struct tlsev *t"
.Ft struct sockaddr_in6 *
.Fn tlsev_peer "struct tlsev *t"
.Ft X509 *
.Fn tlsev_peer_cert "struct tlsev *t"
.Ft struct tlsev *
.Fn tlsev_get "struct tlsev_listener *l" "int fd"
.Ft struct tlsev *
.Fn tlsev_get_by_ctx "X509_STORE_CTX *ctx"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These accessors return information about a single client session
.Vt "struct tlsev *"
or look one up by external identifiers.
None of them allocate or modify state; the returned pointers are owned
by the listener and remain valid only as long as the corresponding
client session does.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_id
returns a monotonically increasing unsigned 64-bit identifier assigned
to
.Fa t
when its TCP connection was accepted.
Identifiers are unique within the lifetime of a listener and never
recycled, making them safe to embed in messages forwarded to a backend
that may later reply asynchronously.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_fd
returns the kernel file descriptor backing the client's TCP socket.
The descriptor is owned by the listener; callers must not
.Xr close 2
it.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_peer
returns a pointer to the
.Vt "struct sockaddr_in6"
recorded at accept time.
For IPv4 peers the storage is reinterpreted as a
.Vt "struct sockaddr_in"
in the conventional way; callers should consult
.Fa sin6_family
to discriminate.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_peer_cert
returns the peer's leaf certificate as an
.Vt "X509 *" ,
or
.Dv NULL
if the peer did not present one.
The returned reference is owned by the listener and freed when
.Fa t
is closed; callers that need to outlive the session must take their
own reference via
.Xr X509_up_ref 3 .
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_get
returns the
.Vt "struct tlsev *"
associated with file descriptor
.Fa fd
on listener
.Fa l ,
or
.Dv NULL
if no such session exists.
This is the inverse of
.Fn tlsev_fd
and is useful when a callback receives only a file descriptor (for
example, in
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb )
and needs to resolve it to a session.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_get_by_ctx
returns the
.Vt "struct tlsev *"
associated with an
.Xr SSL_CTX 3
certificate-verification context, by extracting the
.Vt "SSL *"
from
.Fa ctx
and consulting per-session external data set by the listener.
This is the canonical way to recover the session pointer from inside a
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3
callback.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tlsev_id
and
.Fn tlsev_fd
return the values described above.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_peer ,
.Fn tlsev_peer_cert ,
.Fn tlsev_get ,
and
.Fn tlsev_get_by_ctx
return a pointer on success, or
.Dv NULL
when the requested information is not available.
None of these functions set
.Va errno .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_reply 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_set_verify 3 ,
.Xr X509_up_ref 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tlsev
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
