.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev
.Nd single-threaded TLS event-loop library
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
library terminates TLS connections from many concurrent clients on a
single-threaded, level-triggered event loop and dispatches their
decrypted application messages to a user-provided callback.
It is intended as the foundation of small purpose-built network
services where a dedicated event-loop layer such as
.Sy libevent
would be more dependency than the service is worth.
.Pp
On Linux the event loop is implemented with
.Xr epoll_wait 2 ;
on
.Ox
and other BSDs, with
.Xr kevent 2 .
The choice is made at compile time; the API is identical on either
platform.
.Sh OVERVIEW
A
.Nm
service is built around a single
.Vt "struct tlsev_listener" .
The listener owns the listening sockets, the per-client session table,
the timeout heap, and a peer-tree used to enforce per-IP connection
caps.
.Pp
Each accepted client is represented by a
.Vt "struct tlsev" .
Per-session state is held in two OpenSSL or LibreSSL memory-backed
.Vt BIO
objects:
the read
.Vt BIO
receives encrypted bytes from the socket, and the write
.Vt BIO
buffers encrypted bytes destined for the socket.
TCP back-pressure is propagated by suspending reads on a client whose
write buffer cannot drain; see
.Xr tlsev_reply 3 .
.Pp
Sessions are uniquely identified by a monotonically increasing 64-bit
identifier
.Pq Xr tlsev_id 3
that is safe to forward to a back-end process and use as a return
address, even across file descriptor reuse.
.Sh LIFECYCLE
A typical service follows this order:
.Bl -enum
.It
Create one or more bound and listening sockets.
.It
Build an
.Vt SSL_CTX
configured with a server certificate, key, peer-verification
callback, and any session-cache policy required.
.It
Call
.Xr tlsev_init 3
to associate those sockets and the
.Vt SSL_CTX
with a fresh listener, passing the
.Fa in_cb
callback that will receive decrypted application bytes and the
optional
.Fa in_cb_data_free
callback used to release per-connection state at close time.
.It
Optionally tune the listener with
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip 3 ,
or
.Xr tlsev_auto_rcv_lowat 3 ,
and register any additional file descriptors that should share the
event loop with
.Xr tlsev_add_fd_cb 3 .
.It
Enter the loop with
.Xr tlsev_run 3 ,
passing an optional per-iteration
.Fa tasks
hook (used for things like certificate hot-reload or counter rollups).
.It
On shutdown signal, call
.Xr tlsev_shutdown 3
from the signal handler.
The listening sockets stop accepting new connections; existing
connections are allowed to drain their write buffers before being
closed.
.Xr tlsev_run 3
returns once the last active client has gone.
.It
Call
.Xr tlsev_destroy 3
to release listener resources.
The caller retains ownership of the
.Vt SSL_CTX .
.El
.Sh CALLBACK CONTRACT
The
.Fa in_cb
callback is invoked from inside
.Xr tlsev_run 3
whenever decrypted bytes are available for a client.
It receives:
.Bl -tag -width "void **data"
.It Vt "struct tlsev *t"
The session those bytes belong to.
.It Vt "const char *buf , size_t n"
The plaintext bytes;
.Fa buf
is a transient buffer owned by the listener and must not be retained
beyond the call.
.It Vt "void **data"
A per-session slot owned by the listener.
On the first call for a session,
.Va *data
is
.Dv NULL ;
the callback may allocate state and store the pointer there.
On every subsequent call for the same session,
.Va *data
is the value the callback last stored.
.El
.Pp
The callback returns zero to keep the session open or
.Dv -1
to close it immediately, discarding any pending output.
For orderly close after flushing pending bytes, call
.Xr tlsev_drain 3
and return zero.
.Pp
If
.Fa in_cb_data_free
was supplied to
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
it is invoked at close time with the value the callback last stored in
.Va *data ,
allowing per-session state to be released.
.Sh BACK-PRESSURE AND TIMEOUTS
Connections are reaped when idle.
The effective timeout for any given session scales linearly between
the configured minimum and maximum based on the current load
.Po see Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 Pc ,
shrinking idle tolerance as the listener fills up.
.Pp
When a client cannot keep up with output, the listener buffers in its
write
.Vt BIO
and, on a short write to the socket, in an auxiliary retry buffer.
Reads on that client are paused until the buffer drains, propagating
TCP back-pressure to the peer rather than absorbing it on the server.
.Pp
Per-IP fairness is enforced by
.Xr tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip 3 :
a connection that would exceed the configured cap is rejected before
the TLS handshake begins.
.Sh THREAD AND SIGNAL SAFETY
.Nm
is single-threaded.
A given listener must be driven by exactly one thread.
.Pp
.Xr tlsev_shutdown 3
is async-signal-safe and is the only function in the library safe to
call from a signal handler.
All other entry points must be called from the same thread that runs
the loop, typically from inside the
.Fa tasks
hook or from
.Fa in_cb .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_reply 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_peer 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_dump_counters 3 ,
.Xr epoll_wait 2 ,
.Xr kevent 2 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
