.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV_INIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev_init ,
.Nm tlsev_destroy ,
.Nm tlsev_run ,
.Nm tlsev_shutdown
.Nd lifecycle of a tlsev TLS event-loop listener
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Ft int
.Fo tlsev_init
.Fa "struct tlsev_listener *l"
.Fa "int *lsock"
.Fa "size_t lsock_len"
.Fa "uint32_t max_clients"
.Fa "SSL_CTX *ctx"
.Fa "int (*in_cb)(struct tlsev *, const char *, size_t, void **)"
.Fa "void (*in_cb_data_free)(struct tlsev *, void *)"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn tlsev_destroy "struct tlsev_listener *l"
.Ft int
.Fo tlsev_run
.Fa "struct tlsev_listener *l"
.Fa "int (*tasks)(struct tlsev_listener *, void *)"
.Fa "void *task_args"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn tlsev_shutdown "struct tlsev_listener *l"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm tlsev
library implements a single-threaded, level-triggered event loop that
terminates TLS connections from many concurrent clients and dispatches
their application-layer messages to a user-provided callback.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_init
initializes the listener
.Fa l
in place.
Its remaining arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "in_cb_data_free"
.It Fa lsock , lsock_len
An array of
.Fa lsock_len
already-bound, already-listening TCP socket descriptors.
The listener takes ownership and switches them to non-blocking mode.
.It Fa max_clients
Cap on the number of concurrent TLS sessions accepted on this listener.
When the cap is reached, the listening sockets are disarmed until enough
clients disconnect.
The value is clamped to
.Dv TLSEV_MAX_CLIENTS .
.It Fa ctx
The SSL context used for every accepted connection.
The listener does not take ownership.
.It Fa in_cb
Invoked whenever bytes from a TLS-decrypted client message become
available.
It receives the calling
.Vt "struct tlsev *" ,
a pointer to a buffer and its length, and a
.Vt "void **"
slot owned by the listener that the callback may use to attach
per-connection state across calls.
Returning
.Dv -1
causes the connection to be closed.
.It Fa in_cb_data_free
If not
.Dv NULL ,
invoked at connection close time with the value the callback last stored
in the
.Vt "void **"
slot, allowing the user to release per-connection state.
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_run
enters the event loop on listener
.Fa l .
The function returns only after
.Fn tlsev_shutdown
has been called
.Em and
all active clients have drained.
Its remaining arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "task_args"
.It Fa tasks
If not
.Dv NULL ,
called once per iteration after polling and dispatching events.
Returning zero terminates the loop with a failure status; returning
non-zero continues normally.
.It Fa task_args
Opaque pointer forwarded to
.Fa tasks
on every invocation.
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_shutdown
requests an orderly shutdown.
It is async-signal-safe and may be called from a signal handler.
The listening sockets stop accepting new connections; existing
connections are allowed to finish draining their write buffers before
being closed.
.Fn tlsev_run
returns once the last active client has been closed.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_destroy
releases all resources held by the listener:
remaining client sessions are forcibly closed (without draining),
their per-connection state freed via
.Fa in_cb_data_free ,
the underlying kqueue or epoll instance is closed, and the listening
sockets associated with the listener are freed.
The
.Fa SSL_CTX
passed to
.Fn tlsev_init
is
.Em not
freed.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tlsev_init
returns 0 on success and \-1 on failure with
.Va errno
set to indicate the error.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_run
returns 0 if the loop exited because
.Fn tlsev_shutdown
was called and all clients drained, and \-1 if polling failed or a
.Fa tasks
callback returned zero.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_destroy
and
.Fn tlsev_shutdown
return no value.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn tlsev_init
fails with the following errno values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa l
or
.Fa ctx
is
.Dv NULL ,
or
.Fa in_cb
is
.Dv NULL .
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Memory allocation failed while constructing internal state.
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_init
may also fail with any
.Va errno
returned by
.Xr fcntl 2 ,
.Xr kqueue 2 ,
.Xr kevent 2 ,
.Xr epoll_create1 2 ,
or
.Xr epoll_ctl 2 .
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_run
sets
.Va errno
to whatever
.Xr kevent 2
or
.Xr epoll_wait 2
returned when polling failed.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_reply 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_peer 3 ,
.Xr SSL_CTX_new 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tlsev
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
