.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV_SET_SOCKET_TIMEOUTS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev_set_socket_timeouts ,
.Nm tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip ,
.Nm tlsev_auto_rcv_lowat ,
.Nm tlsev_add_fd_cb
.Nd tune a tlsev listener and extend its event loop
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_set_socket_timeouts "struct tlsev_listener *l" "int min" "int max"
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip "struct tlsev_listener *l" "uint16_t n"
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_auto_rcv_lowat "struct tlsev_listener *l" "int on"
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb "struct tlsev_listener *l" "struct tlsev_fd_cb *fd_cb"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions configure runtime behavior of a listener after it has
been initialized by
.Xr tlsev_init 3
and before
.Xr tlsev_run 3
is entered.
With the exception of
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb ,
they may also be called from within the
.Fa tasks
hook of
.Xr tlsev_run 3
to adjust behavior at runtime.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_set_socket_timeouts
sets the inactivity window after which an idle TLS connection is closed.
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width "max"
.It Fa min
Lower bound on the timeout in seconds, applied when the listener is at
or near
.Fa max_clients .
.It Fa max
Upper bound in seconds, applied when the listener is otherwise idle.
The effective timeout for any given connection scales linearly between
.Fa min
and
.Fa max
based on
.Fa active_clients
versus
.Fa max_clients ,
shrinking idle tolerance under load.
Both values must be non-negative and
.Fa min
must be less than or equal to
.Fa max .
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip
caps the number of concurrent connections from a single peer address to
.Fa n .
A new accept that would exceed this cap is rejected immediately, before
the TLS handshake begins.
.Fa n
must be at least 1.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_auto_rcv_lowat
toggles the listener's automatic management of the
.Dv SO_RCVLOWAT
socket option on TLS client sockets.
When
.Fa on
is non-zero, the listener observes how many bytes
.Xr SSL_read 3
indicated it still needs to complete a record and sets the socket's low
watermark accordingly, so the event loop is not woken on every fragment
of a partially-arrived TLS record.
The default, established by
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
is enabled.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb
registers an additional file descriptor with the listener's event loop.
.Fa fd_cb
points to a caller-owned structure describing the file descriptor and a
read-event callback; the listener copies the contents and may be called
back any time the descriptor is readable.
The callback should return a positive value to remain registered, or
.Dv 0
or negative to be removed from the listener at the end of the current
event-loop iteration.
This is typically used to integrate a non-TLS control socket or a pipe
from a worker process with the same event loop that serves clients.
.Pp
The
.Vt struct tlsev_fd_cb
fields are:
.Bl -tag -width "fd"
.It Fa fd
The file descriptor to monitor for readability.
The listener does not change its blocking mode or take ownership;
the caller remains responsible for closing it.
.It Fa cb
The callback function invoked when
.Fa fd
becomes readable, with
.Fa fd
as its only argument.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All four functions return 0 on success and \-1 on failure with
.Va errno
set to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn tlsev_set_socket_timeouts ,
.Fn tlsev_set_max_conns_per_ip ,
and
.Fn tlsev_auto_rcv_lowat
fail with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa l
is
.Dv NULL ,
or the supplied value is out of range
.Po
.Fa min
or
.Fa max
negative, or
.Fa min No > Fa max ;
.Fa n
is zero
.Pc .
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb
fails with:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa l
or
.Fa fd_cb
is
.Dv NULL .
.It Bq Er EOVERFLOW
The maximum number of monitored descriptors would exceed
.Dv INT_MAX .
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Memory allocation failed while growing the callback array.
.El
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_add_fd_cb
may also fail with any
.Va errno
returned by
.Xr kevent 2
or
.Xr epoll_ctl 2 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_reply 3 ,
.Xr setsockopt 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tlsev
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
