.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV_REPLY 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev_reply ,
.Nm tlsev_drain ,
.Nm tlsev_outbufsz
.Nd send bytes to a tlsev client and control the close-after-flush lifecycle
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Ft int
.Fn tlsev_reply "struct tlsev *t" "const unsigned char *buf" "int len"
.Ft void
.Fn tlsev_drain "struct tlsev *t"
.Ft size_t
.Fn tlsev_outbufsz "struct tlsev *t"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn tlsev_reply
queues plaintext bytes for delivery to the TLS client associated with
.Fa t .
The buffer
.Fa buf
of
.Fa len
bytes is encrypted via
.Xr SSL_write 3
and either written to the socket immediately or buffered for later
transmission.
If the underlying TCP send buffer is full, the residual is retained
inside the listener's per-connection state and drained on subsequent
write-readiness events.
While output is buffered, reads on the client are paused so that TCP
back-pressure can propagate to the peer.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_reply
should be called from inside the
.Fa in_cb
callback registered at
.Xr tlsev_init 3
time, or from within the
.Fa tasks
hook of
.Xr tlsev_run 3 .
It is not safe to call from a signal handler.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_drain
marks
.Fa t
to be closed once its outgoing buffer is fully flushed to the peer.
Any pending writes are sent, and the connection is closed after the last
byte reaches the socket.
Calling
.Fn tlsev_drain
on a connection with no buffered output causes it to be closed on the
next event-loop iteration.
This is the orderly counterpart to closing the connection from inside
.Fa in_cb
by returning
.Dv -1 ,
which closes immediately and discards any pending output.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_outbufsz
returns the number of raw bytes currently queued for delivery to
.Fa t ,
including both the bytes still inside the TLS write
.Vt BIO
and any residual stored after a short write to the socket.
A return of zero indicates that the TLS layer has nothing pending for
this client.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tlsev_reply
returns the number of raw bytes currently pending for the client (a
non-negative value) on success, or
.Dv -1
on failure with
.Va errno
set to indicate the error.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_outbufsz
returns the byte count described above.
.Pp
.Fn tlsev_drain
returns no value.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn tlsev_reply
fails with the following errno values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
.Xr SSL_write 3
could not allocate memory for the encrypted output.
.It Bq Er EOVERFLOW
The amount of buffered output would exceed
.Dv INT_MAX
bytes.
.It Bq Er EIO
Registering for write-readiness via
.Xr kevent 2
or
.Xr epoll_ctl 2
failed.
The connection is closed before
.Fn tlsev_reply
returns; the caller must not use
.Fa t
afterward.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_peer 3 ,
.Xr SSL_write 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tlsev
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
