.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt TLSEV_DUMP_COUNTERS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tlsev_dump_counters
.Nd snapshot and reset a tlsev listener's counters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/tlsev.h
.Ft void
.Fn tlsev_dump_counters "struct tlsev_listener *l" "struct tlsev_counters *c"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn tlsev_dump_counters
copies the current counter values of listener
.Fa l
into the caller-provided
.Fa c ,
then resets the listener's accumulating counters to zero.
The
.Va active_clients
field is treated as a gauge: it is overwritten to the listener's current
client count immediately after the reset, so its reported value reflects
the instant of the snapshot rather than a delta.
All other fields are deltas accumulated since the previous call to
.Fn tlsev_dump_counters .
.Pp
The fields of
.Vt struct tlsev_counters
are:
.Bl -tag -width "accept_conn_aborted"
.It Va raw_bytes_in
Encrypted bytes read from client sockets.
.It Va raw_bytes_out
Encrypted bytes written to client sockets.
.It Va ssl_bytes_in
Decrypted application bytes delivered to the
.Fa in_cb
callback.
.It Va ssl_bytes_out
Application bytes accepted by
.Xr tlsev_reply 3
(before encryption).
.It Va client_accepts
Connections successfully accepted and added to the listener.
.It Va read_pauses
Connections whose reads were paused because their outgoing buffer was
non-empty, applying back-pressure to the peer.
.It Va wasted_accepts
Event-loop wakeups for accept readiness that yielded
.Er EWOULDBLOCK ,
typically caused by another listener in the prefork group winning the
accept.
.It Va accept_conn_aborted
Accepts that failed with
.Er ECONNABORTED
because the peer closed the connection between the TCP handshake and
the accept.
.It Va file_ulimit_hits
Accepts that failed with
.Er EMFILE
.Pq per-process file descriptor limit reached .
When this fires the listener also lowers
.Va max_clients
to the current
.Va active_clients .
.It Va sys_ulimit_hits
Accepts that failed with
.Er ENFILE
.Pq system-wide file descriptor limit reached .
.It Va active_clients
Gauge: number of TLS clients currently connected at the moment of the
snapshot.
.It Va max_clients_reached
Number of times the listener stopped accepting new connections because
.Va active_clients
reached
.Va max_clients .
.It Va session_timeouts
Connections closed because they exceeded the inactivity timeout
configured via
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3 .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn tlsev_dump_counters
returns no value.
It does not fail.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tlsev_init 3 ,
.Xr tlsev_set_socket_timeouts 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm tlsev
library first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
