.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt UTIL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm daemonize ,
.Nm drop_privileges ,
.Nm readall ,
.Nm writeall ,
.Nm close_x ,
.Nm spawn ,
.Nm spawnproc_init ,
.Nm spawnproc_exec ,
.Nm spawnproc_close ,
.Nm strarray_alloc ,
.Nm strarray_add
.Nd assorted process, I/O, and string-array helpers used by mdr
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/util.h
.Ft int
.Fn daemonize "const char *program" "const char *pid_path" "int nochdir" "int noclose" "struct xerr *e"
.Ft int
.Fn drop_privileges "const char *user" "const char *group" "struct xerr *e"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn readall "int fd" "void *buf" "size_t count"
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn writeall "int fd" "const void *buf" "size_t count"
.Fn CLOSE_X "fd"
.Ft void
.Fn close_x "int fd" "const char *fd_name" "const char *fn" "int line"
.Ft int
.Fo spawn
.Fa "char *const argv[]"
.Fa "pid_t *pid"
.Fa "int *in"
.Fa "int *out"
.Fa "const char *user"
.Fa "const char *group"
.Fa "struct xerr *e"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn spawnproc_init "struct spawnproc *sp" "int nochdir" "const char *execpromises" "char **perms"
.Ft int
.Fo spawnproc_exec
.Fa "struct spawnproc *sp"
.Fa "char *const argv[]"
.Fa "pid_t *cpid"
.Fa "int *in"
.Fa "int *out"
.Fa "const char *user"
.Fa "const char *group"
.Fa "struct xerr *e"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fn spawnproc_close "struct spawnproc *sp"
.Ft "char **"
.Fn strarray_alloc "size_t n" "size_t len"
.Ft "char **"
.Fn strarray_add "char **a" "const char *str"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm util
collects small routines that
.Sy mdr
needs in more than one component but that are not specific to any one
of them: daemonisation, privilege drop, robust read/write loops, a
small process-spawning helper, and a string-array container suitable
for building
.Xr execv 3
argument lists.
.Sh DAEMONIZATION
.Fn daemonize
turns the caller into a conventional Unix daemon.
It opens
.Fa pid_path
exclusively, locks it with
.Xr flock 2 ,
.Xr fork 2 Ns s
once and exits the parent, then
.Xr setsid 2 Ns s ,
re-arms
.Xr xlog 3
with the
.Dv LOG_DAEMON
facility and the program name
.Fa program ,
optionally
.Xr chdir 2 Ns s
to
.Sy /
and redirects the standard descriptors to
.Pa /dev/null ,
and finally writes the daemon's pid to the locked pid file and
.Xr fsync 2 Ns s
it.
.Pp
.Fa nochdir
suppresses the
.Xr chdir 2
step; useful for daemons that must keep a specific working directory.
.Fa noclose
suppresses the redirection of
.Dv stdin , stdout , stderr ;
useful when running under a supervisor that has already arranged the
descriptors as desired, or during foreground debug runs.
.Pp
The pid file descriptor is intentionally never closed in the running
daemon: keeping its
.Xr flock 2
held is what prevents a second instance from starting against the same
pid file.
.Pp
.Fn daemonize
covers the same ground as the BSD
.Xr daemon 3
library function but bundles in the work most callers of
.Xr daemon 3
end up writing by hand:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
A locked pid file is created at
.Fa pid_path
and the daemon's pid is written into it.
A second invocation against the same path fails immediately on the
.Xr flock 2 ,
giving single-instance enforcement without a separate watchdog.
.It
.Xr xlog 3
is re-armed under the
.Dv LOG_DAEMON
facility with
.Fa program
as the syslog identifier, so log lines after the fork carry the
expected program tag instead of whatever the parent had open.
.It
Errors before the
.Xr fork 2
are reported through
.Fa e
in the usual
.Vt "struct xerr"
style rather than through
.Va errno
on a \-1 return; errors after the fork
.Pq Xr setsid 2 , Xr chdir 2 , Xr open 2 No of Pa /dev/null , pid-file write
are logged via
.Xr xlog 3
and cause the child to
.Xr exit 3
with status 1, since the parent that would have observed a return
value has already exited.
.El
.Pp
A caller that does not want the pid-file or syslog behaviour should
keep using
.Xr daemon 3 ;
.Fn daemonize
is the right choice when those concerns belong to the daemon itself.
.Pp
.Fn drop_privileges
calls
.Xr getgrnam 3
and
.Xr setgid 2
.No / Xr setegid 2 ,
then
.Xr getpwnam 3
and
.Xr setuid 2
.No / Xr seteuid 2 ,
to switch the process to the named user and group.
Either name may be
.Dv NULL
to skip its half of the change.
The function does not perform any of the additional hardening one
might expect (initgroups, supplementary group cleanup) and is meant to
be called by short-lived child processes immediately before
.Xr execv 3 .
.Sh BLOCKING I/O LOOPS
.Fn readall
loops over
.Xr read 2
until
.Fa count
bytes have been read or end-of-file is reached.
.Xr read 2 No returns interrupted by Er EINTR
are retried automatically.
On end-of-file before
.Fa count
bytes have been read, the partial count is returned;
.Fn readall
itself never returns a short count without explanation.
.Pp
.Fn writeall
is the mirror image for
.Xr write 2 .
It loops until all
.Fa count
bytes have been written, retrying on
.Er EINTR .
Short writes never escape the function.
.Pp
Both are intended for use on blocking file descriptors, typically the
control pipes between forked components of a service.
They make no provision for non-blocking sockets and should not be used
where the descriptor may return
.Er EAGAIN .
.Pp
.Fn close_x
is a wrapper around
.Xr close 2
that logs at
.Dv LOG_ERR
when the underlying
.Xr close 2
fails, including the source-level name of the descriptor, the
enclosing function, and the line number passed in.
The
.Dv CLOSE_X
macro captures
.Va __func__
and
.Va __LINE__
and the stringified argument automatically, so callers ordinarily
write only
.Fn CLOSE_X fd .
The intent is to make accidentally-ignored close errors easy to find
in logs.
.Sh SPAWNING CHILD PROCESSES
.Fn spawn
forks a child that executes
.Fa argv[0]
with arguments
.Fa argv .
The child's
.Dv stdin
is connected to the pipe end returned in
.Fa *in
and its
.Dv stdout
to the pipe end returned in
.Fa *out ,
both from the parent's perspective.
The child's
.Dv stderr
is redirected to
.Pa /dev/null .
If the calling process is running as
.Sy root
and either
.Fa user
or
.Fa group
is non-NULL,
.Fn drop_privileges
is invoked in the child between
.Xr fork 2
and
.Xr execv 3 .
The child's pid is returned in
.Fa *pid .
.Pp
On any failure
.Fa e
is filled in and the function returns \-1; any pipes already opened
are torn down so the caller never receives a half-initialized state.
.Sh PRIVILEGED EXEC PROCESS
For services that need to repeatedly spawn helper executables long
after dropping privileges,
.Fn spawnproc_init
sets up a dedicated executor child that retains the privileges
required to do so.
The pair communicates over a
.Xr socketpair 2 .
.Pp
.Fn spawnproc_init
takes ownership of the executor:
.Bl -tag -width "execpromises"
.It Fa nochdir
If zero, the executor
.Xr chdir 2 Ns s
to
.Sy / .
.It Fa execpromises
On
.Ox ,
passed verbatim as the second argument to
.Xr pledge 2
so the spawned children inherit a constrained promise set.
Ignored on other platforms.
.It Fa perms
On
.Ox ,
a NULL-terminated array of
.Sq permissions=path
strings handed to
.Xr unveil 2
inside the executor before its
.Xr pledge 2
call.
A small default set covering
.Pa /etc/passwd ,
.Pa /etc/group ,
the dynamic linker, and the system library paths is always unveiled
first.
Ignored on other platforms.
.El
.Pp
Once
.Fn spawnproc_init
returns the executor is running and waiting for requests.
.Pp
.Fn spawnproc_exec
asks the executor to run
.Fa argv
under the named
.Fa user
and
.Fa group ,
and returns the resulting pipes
.Po
.Fa *in
for the child's
.Dv stdin ,
.Fa *out
for its
.Dv stdout
.Pc
together with the child's pid in
.Fa *cpid .
The pipes travel back from the executor through
.Xr sendmsg 2
.Pq Dv SCM_RIGHTS .
The implementation is built on top of
.Fn spawn ;
the per-request semantics described in
.Sx SPAWNING CHILD PROCESSES
apply.
The combined length of
.Fa user ,
.Fa group ,
and
.Fa argv ,
each NUL-separated, must not exceed roughly twice
.Dv ARG_MAX .
.Pp
The executor is a single-threaded request/response loop; concurrent
calls to
.Fn spawnproc_exec
on the same
.Vt "struct spawnproc"
are not safe.
.Pp
.Fn spawnproc_close
closes the socket end held by the parent.
The executor observes the EOF, drains, and exits; pending children it
has already spawned continue running.
.Sh STRING ARRAYS
.Fn strarray_alloc
allocates a NULL-terminated
.Vt "char **"
array of
.Fa n
entries where every entry points into the same backing allocation and
has room for
.Fa len
bytes of NUL-terminated content.
The pointer-and-bytes layout means the entire array can be freed with
a single
.Xr free 3 .
.Pp
.Fn strarray_add
returns a NULL-terminated
.Vt "char **"
array with the contents of
.Fa a
plus
.Fa str
appended at the end.
The function may return a pointer different from
.Fa a ,
since the backing buffer is grown with
.Xr realloc 3 ;
the caller must replace its handle:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
char **argv = NULL;
argv = strarray_add(argv, "ls");
argv = strarray_add(argv, "-l");
argv = strarray_add(argv, "/etc");
.Ed
.Pp
.Fa a
may be
.Dv NULL ,
in which case a fresh single-element array is allocated.
On success the returned array is again freeable with a single
.Xr free 3 .
On failure
.Fa a
is left untouched and
.Dv NULL
is returned, with
.Va errno
set by the underlying allocator.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn daemonize ,
.Fn drop_privileges ,
.Fn spawn ,
.Fn spawnproc_init ,
and
.Fn spawnproc_exec
return 0 on success and \-1 on failure, with
.Fa e
filled in to describe the cause; see
.Xr xlog 3 .
.Fn spawnproc_init
also returns \-1 if any pre-fork allocation or socket setup fails;
errors that occur inside the executor child are logged through
.Xr xlog 3
and cause that child to exit with status 1.
.Pp
.Fn readall
and
.Fn writeall
return the number of bytes transferred on success, or \-1 on failure
with
.Va errno
set.
.Fn readall
may return less than
.Fa count
if it encountered end-of-file before all bytes were read.
.Pp
.Fn spawnproc_close
returns the status of the underlying
.Xr close 2 .
.Pp
.Fn close_x
returns no value.
.Pp
.Fn strarray_alloc
and
.Fn strarray_add
return a pointer to the resulting array, or
.Dv NULL
on allocation failure with
.Va errno
set.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
None of these functions are reentrant against shared state of their
own, but several touch process-global state in ways that constrain
concurrent use:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
.Fn daemonize
must be called from a single-threaded program; it
.Xr fork 2 Ns s
and changes session leadership.
.It
.Fn drop_privileges
mutates the process's uid and gid and must not race with anything
that depends on those credentials.
.It
A single
.Vt "struct spawnproc"
is a single-threaded channel; callers that need concurrency must
serialise around it or create one executor per worker.
.El
.Pp
The remaining helpers
.Po
.Fn readall ,
.Fn writeall ,
.Fn close_x ,
.Fn strarray_alloc ,
.Fn strarray_add
.Pc
operate only on their arguments and may be called from any thread.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr fork 2 ,
.Xr pledge 2 ,
.Xr unveil 2 ,
.Xr execv 3 ,
.Xr xlog 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm util
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
