.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Pascal Lalonde <plalonde@overnet.ca>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.Dd $Mdocdate$
.Dt XLOG 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xlog ,
.Nm xlog_init ,
.Nm xlog_init2 ,
.Nm xlog_dbg ,
.Nm xlog_strerror ,
.Nm xerrz ,
.Nm xerrf ,
.Nm xerrfn ,
.Nm xerr_fail ,
.Nm xerr_is ,
.Nm xerr_prepend ,
.Nm xerr_print
.Nd structured error propagation and syslog-based logging
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In mdr/xlog.h
.Ft int
.Fn xlog_init "const char *progname" "const char *dbg_spec" "const char *logf" "int perror"
.Ft int
.Fn xlog_init2 "const char *progname" "int facility" "const char *dbg_spec" "const char *logf" "int perror"
.Ft void
.Fn xlog "int priority" "const struct xerr *e" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn xlog_dbg "xlog_mask_t module" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn xlog_strerror "int priority" "int err" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft "struct xerr *"
.Fn xerrz "struct xerr *e"
.Ft int
.Fn xerrf "struct xerr *e" "int space" "int code" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft int
.Fn xerrfn "struct xerr *e" "int space" "int code" "const char *fn" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Fn XERRF "e" "space" "code" "fmt" "..."
.Ft int
.Fn xerr_fail "const struct xerr *e"
.Ft int
.Fn xerr_is "const struct xerr *e" "int space" "int code"
.Ft int
.Fn xerr_prepend "struct xerr *e" "const char *prefix"
.Fn XERR_PREPENDFN "e"
.Ft void
.Fn xerr_print "const struct xerr *e"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
provides two complementary facilities:
a
.Vt struct xerr
type that carries a structured, context-rich error description from
the failure site up the call stack, and a thin
.Xr syslog 3
wrapper that knows how to render a
.Vt struct xerr
into a single readable log line.
The two are usable independently, but most callers in
.Sy mdr
use them together.
.Sh THE XERR STRUCTURE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct xerr {
        char            msg[LINE_MAX];
        enum xerr_space sp;
        int64_t         code;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va sp
selects the
.Em error space
that
.Va code
is interpreted in, so that the same numeric value can mean different
things in different contexts.
The library knows about the following spaces:
.Bl -tag -width "XLOG_ERRNO"
.It Dv XLOG_NONE
No error;
.Va code
is also zero.
.It Dv XLOG_APP
An application-defined condition.
.Va code
is one of the
.Dv XLOG_*
constants
.Po
.Dv XLOG_FAIL ,
.Dv XLOG_EOF ,
.Dv XLOG_DENIED ,
.Dv XLOG_LIMITED ,
.Dv XLOG_INVALID ,
.Dv XLOG_BADMSG ,
.Dv XLOG_NOTFOUND ,
.Dv XLOG_IO ,
.Dv XLOG_OVERFLOW ,
.Dv XLOG_RANGE ,
.Dv XLOG_SHORTIO ,
.Dv XLOG_BUSY ,
.Dv XLOG_NOTSUP ,
.Dv XLOG_TIMEOUT ,
.Dv XLOG_WOULDBLOCK ,
.Dv XLOG_CALLBACK_ERR
.Pc
or a caller-defined value at or above
.Dv XLOG_USER_DEFINED .
.It Dv XLOG_ERRNO
.Va code
is a POSIX
.Va errno
value.
.Fn xlog
and
.Fn xerr_print
look up the corresponding string with
.Xr strerror_r 3 .
.It Dv XLOG_SSL
.Va code
is an OpenSSL or LibreSSL error code.
The rendered string comes from
.Xr ERR_error_string_n 3 .
.It Dv XLOG_EAI
.Va code
is a
.Xr getaddrinfo 3
return value, rendered through
.Xr gai_strerror 3 .
.It Dv XLOG_DB
.Va code
is a database driver error
.Pq for example, an SQLite result code .
The driver-specific string is left for the caller to embed in
.Va msg .
.El
.Pp
An application that needs its own error spaces may use values at or
above
.Dv XLOG_SP_USER_DEFINED .
.Pp
.Va msg
is a free-form context string filled in at the failure site, typically
naming the operation that failed and the salient inputs.
It is sized to
.Dv LINE_MAX
so the entire error fits in a single log line; longer messages are
truncated with a trailing
.Sq *
sentinel.
.Sh BUILDING AND PROPAGATING ERRORS
The recommended pattern is for every function that may fail to take a
.Vt "struct xerr *"
out-parameter and to return
.Li -1
on failure, with
.Fn xerrf
or the
.Dv XERRF
macro filling the xerr in place:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int
do_thing(struct xerr *e)
{
        if (open(...) == -1)
                return XERRF(e, XLOG_ERRNO, errno, "open foo");
        ...
        return 0;
}
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn xerrf
writes
.Fa space
and
.Fa code
into
.Fa e ,
formats
.Fa fmt
and the trailing arguments into
.Va e->msg ,
and returns
.Li -1
when either
.Fa space
or
.Fa code
is non-zero, or
.Li 0
when both are zero.
The return value is meant to be used directly as the caller's return
status.
A
.Dv NULL
.Fa e
is permitted; the function still returns the same value.
.Pp
.Fn xerrfn
is identical except that it prefixes
.Va msg
with
.Fa fn ,
allowing callers to record the current function name.
The
.Dv XERRF
macro is a thin wrapper that calls
.Fn xerrfn
with
.Va __func__
automatically.
.Pp
.Fn xerrz
zeroes an xerr.
The library uses it as a parameter wrapper at call sites:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
some_function(xerrz(&e));
.Ed
.Pp
so that the xerr is always cleared before being filled, regardless of
what state it carried before.
.Pp
.Fn xerr_prepend
prepends
.Fa prefix
and
.Li ": "
to the existing
.Va msg ,
which lets a caller layer its own context on top of a failure surfaced
from a lower-level function:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (do_thing(xerrz(e)) == -1)
        return XERR_PREPENDFN(e);
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv XERR_PREPENDFN
macro uses
.Va __func__
as the prefix; it returns whatever
.Fn xerr_fail
would return for the resulting
.Fa e ,
so it is suitable for use directly in a
.Sy return
statement.
.Pp
.Fn xerr_fail
returns non-zero if
.Fa e
holds an error, and zero otherwise.
A
.Dv NULL
.Fa e
counts as no error.
.Pp
.Fn xerr_is
tests whether
.Fa e
is exactly the
.Pq Fa space , code
pair given; it returns
.Fa code
on match
.Pq always non-zero
and zero otherwise.
This is the canonical way to recognise a specific failure mode
.Po for example, distinguishing Dv XLOG_NOTFOUND No from any other Dv XLOG_APP No error Pc .
.Sh REPORTING ERRORS
.Fn xerr_print
renders an xerr through
.Xr warnx 3 ,
producing a single line on
.Dv stderr .
It is the lightweight counterpart of
.Fn xlog
for utilities that have no syslog identity.
.Pp
.Fn xlog
is the primary reporting entry point.
It writes a single line at
.Fa priority
to both
.Xr syslog 3
and, if a log file was configured at init time, that log file.
The exact format depends on
.Fa e :
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
If
.Fa e
is
.Dv NULL ,
the line is
.Fa fmt
formatted with the trailing arguments, tagged with the priority.
.It
If
.Fa e
is non-NULL and carries an
.Va errno ,
.Va EAI ,
or
.Va SSL
code, the rendered string from the corresponding system function is
appended after
.Va e->msg .
.It
.Va fmt
is optional: if
.Dv NULL ,
the line is the context already in
.Va e->msg .
.El
.Pp
Lines never exceed
.Dv LINE_MAX
bytes; oversize content is truncated with a trailing
.Sq * .
.Pp
.Fn xlog_strerror
is a convenience that renders an
.Va errno
value
.Pq Fa err
together with a
.Xr printf 3 Ns -style
context message.
It avoids the verbosity of constructing an xerr just to report a
straightforward
.Xr open 2
or
.Xr read 2
failure.
.Pp
.Fn xlog_dbg
emits a debug-priority line only if its
.Fa module
flag is included in the debug mask configured at
.Fn xlog_init
time.
The mask is built from the comma-separated module list in
.Fa dbg_spec ,
matched against the application-supplied
.Va module_dbg_map
table.
This allows fine-grained debug logging to be toggled per module at
runtime without recompiling.
.Pp
The default
.Va module_dbg_map
in the library defines a single module name
.Sq all
that enables every bit
.Po Dv XLOG_ALL Pc .
Applications normally override the symbol with their own table.
.Sh INITIALIZATION
.Fn xlog_init
calls
.Xr openlog 3
with
.Fa progname
as the identifier and
.Dv LOG_USER
as the facility, then arms the debug subsystem from
.Fa dbg_spec
and, if
.Fa logf
is non-empty, opens that path in append mode for an auxiliary plain-text
copy of every line written by
.Fn xlog ,
.Fn xlog_dbg ,
and
.Fn xlog_strerror .
If
.Fa perror
is non-zero,
.Dv LOG_PERROR
is added to the
.Xr openlog 3
options so that every line is also written to
.Dv stderr .
.Pp
.Fn xlog_init2
is the same but lets the caller pick the syslog
.Fa facility .
Daemons that run multiple services from a single binary use it to
route their messages through, for example,
.Dv LOG_DAEMON .
.Pp
The optional log file is opened once; calling
.Fn xlog_init
again with a different path has no effect on the previously opened
file.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
A single set of debug flags, syslog identity, and optional log file is
shared process-wide.
.Fn xlog_init
should be called once at startup before any concurrent threads start
logging.
After initialization the logging entry points are safe to call from
multiple threads; the underlying
.Xr syslog 3
and
.Xr fprintf 3
are thread-safe on supported platforms.
.Pp
Individual
.Vt struct xerr
instances are caller-owned, single-threaded values; they carry no
locks of their own.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ERR_error_string_n 3 ,
.Xr gai_strerror 3 ,
.Xr strerror_r 3 ,
.Xr syslog 3
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
first appeared in
.Sy mdr
0.8.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Pascal Lalonde Aq Mt plalonde@overnet.ca
